Propose a `Disconnected` type (#3300)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-disconnected.md

# Disconnected

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-disconnected.md)
* Authors: [Franz Busch](https://github.com/FranzBusch)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting implementation**

> * Implementation: [swiftlang/swift#NNNNN](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift/pull/NNNNN)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implementation: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift/pull/89597
```

> * Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/...))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-disconnected-type-for-modeling-disconnected-values/86815))
```

## Introduction

[SE-0414](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0414-region-based-isolation.md)
introduced region-based isolation which leverages control flow sensitive
diagnostics to determine whether non-`Sendable` values are safe to send across
isolation boundaries.
[SE-0430](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0430-transferring-parameters-and-results.md)
introduced the `sending` parameter and result annotation to explicitly mark
values that must be in a disconnected region at function boundaries.

This proposal introduces a `Disconnected` type that preserves the disconnected

> property of a value through storage in data structures, allowing generic types

Reviewer: I think we should expand this section a bit more and place less emphasis on generic types. While data structures are probably the most common use case, you can also use this type to store disconnected values in actors, for example. It's somewhat awkward ergonomically, but it can be useful at times.

Author: Reframed this a bit

> to safely transfer non-`Sendable` values across isolation regions without

Reviewer: I would consider changing the wording "across isolation regions" to "across isolation domains".

Author: I clarified this with @hborla so quoting her here:

> "isolation region" and "isolation domain" are related but distinct concepts. Isolation domains are provided by actors and tasks. Isolation domains have associated regions but some isolation regions are not associated with any domain - that's what a "disconnected" region is.

Reviewer: Yes. The isolation region of a non-Sendable value can be associated with an isolation domain (actor-isolated, task-isolated). Regions without such an association are considered to be disconnected.

I found the phrase "across isolation regions" a little odd, since the non-Sendable value always remains in a disconnected region. Although, AFAIK, each sending operation assigns a fresh disconnected region (hence the need for `~Copyable` here) rather than the region itself being "transferred". While the non-Sendable value remains wrapped in a Disconnected instance, it can be moved across arbitrary isolation domains (or none at all) without the wrapped value itself becoming associated with an isolation domain.

But you're right that "across isolation domains" would be incorrect from an RBI perspective, because a transfer operation does not necessarily imply associating a disconnected region with an isolation domain (as is the case when using the `sending` keyword).

Perhaps we can find a different term for it. Although, on second thought, I think it's probably fine.

requiring those types to reason about the `sending` effect.

## Motivation

Region-based isolation enables transferring non-`Sendable` values across
isolation boundaries when the value is in a disconnected region. The `sending`
parameter and result annotation from SE-0430 allows functions to explicitly
require disconnected values at function boundaries. However, `sending` cannot
be preserved through stored properties, collection types, or generic containers.

Consider a queue implementation that stores elements to be processed across
isolation boundaries. As an example, let's look at a hypothetical `UniqueDeque`:

```swift
struct UniqueDeque<Element: ~Copyable>: ~Copyable {
  func append(_ element: consuming Element) { ... }
  func popFirst() -> Element? { ... }
}
```

> One use-case might want to use the `UniqueDeque` to append non-`Sendable`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One use-case might be to use `UniqueDeque` to append non-`Sendable`
```

disconnected values and when popping an element send it to a different isolation

> region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
domain.
```
